docs: update egress gateway documentation and mark the feature stable (#19862)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/gettingstarted/egress-gateway.rst

BPF masquerading and the kube-proxy replacement are enabled, which may not be
possible in all environments (due to, e.g., incompatible kernel versions).

Compatibility with other features
=================================

L7 policies
-----------

Egress gateway is currently partially incompatible with L7 policies.
Specifically, when an egress gateway policy and an L7 policy both select the same
endpoint, traffic from that endpoint will not go through egress gateway, even if
the policy allows it. Full support will be added in an upcoming release once
:gh-issue:`19642` is resolved.

LB acceleration
---------------

When the egress gateway feature is used in combination with XDP-based LB
acceleration (``--bpf-lb-acceleration=native``), the user must ensure that the
host Iptables configuration allows packets through the ``FORWARD`` chain. Full
support will be added in an upcoming release once :gh-issue:`19717` is resolved.

Enable egress gateway
=====================

The egress gateway feature and all the requirements can be enabled as follow:

.. tabs::
    .. group-tab:: Helm

        .. code-block:: shell-session

>             $ helm upgrade cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\

Reviewer: You need this block to be a `.. parsed-literal::`, or the `|CHART_RELEASE|` substitution won't happen.

               --namespace kube-system \\
               --reuse-values \\
               --set egressGateway.enabled=true \\
               --set bpf.masquerade=true \\
               --set kubeProxyReplacement=strict \\
               --set l7Proxy=false

    .. group-tab:: ConfigMap

        .. code-block:: shell-session

            enable-bpf-masquerade: true
            enable-ipv4-egress-gateway: true
            enable-l7-proxy: false
            kube-proxy-replacement: strict

Compatibility with cloud environments
-------------------------------------

Based on the specific configuration of the cloud provider and network interfaces
it is possible that traffic leaves a node from the wrong interface.

To work around this issue, Cilium can be instructed to install the necessary IP
rules and routes to route traffic through the appropriate network-facing
interface as follow:

.. tabs::
    .. group-tab:: Helm

        .. code-block:: shell-session

>             $ helm upgrade cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\

Reviewer: Same here.

      # Specify the IP address used to SNAT traffic matched by the policy.
      # It must exist as an IP associated with a network interface on the instance.
      egressIP: 10.168.60.100

      # Alternatively it's possible to specify the interface to be used for egress traffic.
      # In this case the first IPv4 assigned to that interface will be used as egress IP.
      # interface: enp0s8

Creating the ``CiliumEgressGatewayPolicy`` resource above would cause all
traffic originating from pods with the ``org: empire`` and ``class: mediabot``
labels in the ``default`` namespace and destined to ``0.0.0.0/0`` (i.e. all
traffic leaving the cluster) to be routed through the gateway node with the
``node.kubernetes.io/name: a-specific-node`` label, which will then SNAT said
traffic with the ``10.168.60.100`` egress IP.

Testing the egress gateway feature
==================================

In this section we are going to show the necessary steps to test the feature.
First we deploy a pod that connects to a cluster-external service. Then we apply
a ``CiliumEgressGatewayPolicy`` and observe that the pod's connection gets
redirected through the Gateway node.

> We assume a 2-node cluster with IPs 192.168.60.11 (node1) and 192.168.60.12

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We assume a 2-node cluster with IPs ``192.168.60.11`` (node1) and ``192.168.60.12``
```

Deploy a client pod that will be used to connect to the Nginx instance:

.. parsed-literal::

    $ kubectl create -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes-dns/dns-sw-app.yaml
    $ kubectl get pods
    NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
    pod/mediabot                     1/1     Running   0          14s

    $ kubectl exec mediabot -- curl http://192.168.60.13:80

Verify from the Nginx access log (or other external services) that the request
is coming from one of the nodes in the Kubernetes cluster. In this example the
access logs should contain something like:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ tail /var/log/nginx/access.log
    [...]
    192.168.60.11 - - [04/Apr/2021:22:06:57 +0000] "GET / HTTP/1.1" 200 612 "-" "curl/7.52.1"

since the client pod is running on the node ``192.168.60.11`` it is expected
that, without any Cilium egress gateway policy in place, traffic will leave the
cluster with the IP of the node.

Apply egress gateway policy
---------------------------

Apply the ``egress-sample`` egress gateway Policy, which will cause all traffic
from the mediabot pod to leave the cluster with the ``10.168.60.100`` IP:

.. parsed-literal::

>     $ kubectl apply -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes-egress-gateway/egress-sample.yaml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    $ kubectl apply -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes-egress-gateway/egress-nat-policy-egress-gateway.yaml
```

.. _egress-gateway:

**********************
Egress Gateway

> **********************

Reviewer: Please adjust the size of the lines above/below.

.. note::

    Egress Gateway requires a 5.2 or more recent kernel.

> The egress gateway feature allows for IPv4 connections originating from pods and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The egress gateway feature routes all IPv4 connections originating from pods
```

> destined to specific cluster-external CIDRs to be routed through particular

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
destined to specific cluster-external CIDRs through particular
```

    information. If unsure, run ``cilium status`` and validate that Cilium is up
    and running.

Preliminary Considerations
==========================

Cilium must make use of network-facing interfaces and IP addresses present on
the designated gateway nodes. These interfaces and IP addresses must be
provisioned and configured by the operator based on their networking
environment. The process is highly-dependent on said networking environment. For
example, in AWS/EKS, and depending on the requirements, this may mean creating
one or more Elastic Network Interfaces with one or more IP addresses and
attaching them to instances that serve as gateway nodes so that AWS can
adequately route traffic flowing from and to the instances. Other cloud
providers have similar networking requirements and constructs.

Additionally, the enablement of the egress gateway feature requires that both
BPF masquerading and the kube-proxy replacement are enabled, which may not be
possible in all environments (due to, e.g., incompatible kernel versions).

Compatibility with other features
=================================

L7 policies
-----------

> Egress gateway is currently partially incompatible with L7 policies .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Egress gateway is currently partially incompatible with L7 policies.
```

> Specifically, when an egress gateway policy and a L7 policy both select the same

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifically, when an egress gateway policy and an L7 policy both select the same
```

> endpoint, traffic from said endpoint will not go through egress gateway, even if

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
endpoint, traffic from that endpoint will not go through the egress gateway, even if
```

the policy allows it. Full support will be added in an upcoming release once
:gh-issue:`19642` is resolved.

LB acceleration
---------------

> When egress gateway is used in combination with XDP-based LB acceleration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the egress gateway is used in combination with XDP-based LB acceleration
```

Reviewer 3: or "an"?

Author: I'll go for "When the egress gateway feature", as we are not referring to any particular not node here

configuration allows packets through the ``FORWARD`` chain. Full support will be
added in an upcoming release once :gh-issue:`19717` is resolved.

Enable Egress Gateway
=====================

The Egress Gateway feature and all the requirements can be enabled as follow:

.. tabs::
    .. group-tab:: Helm

        .. code-block:: shell-session

            $ helm upgrade cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\
               --namespace kube-system \\
               --reuse-values \\
               --set egressGateway.enabled=true \\
               --set bpf.masquerade=true \\
               --set kubeProxyReplacement=strict \\
               --set l7Proxy=false

    .. group-tab:: ConfigMap

        .. code-block:: shell-session

            enable-bpf-masquerade: true
            enable-ipv4-egress-gateway: true
            enable-l7-proxy: false
            kube-proxy-replacement: strict

Compatibility with cloud environments
-------------------------------------

Based on the specific configuration of the cloud provider and network interfaces
it is possible that traffic leaves a node from the wrong interface.

To work around this issue, Cilium can be instructed to install the necessary

> IP rules and routes in order to route traffic through the appropriate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
IP rules and routes to route traffic through the appropriate
```

network-facing interface using the following subset of Helm values:

.. code-block:: yaml

  egressGateway:
    installRoutes: true  # Defaults to 'false'

or alternatively by setting ``install-egress-gateway-routes: true`` in the

> ``cilium-config`` ConfigMap.

Reviewer: Why not reusing a `group-tab` for consistency with the above?

Writing egress gateway policies
===============================

The API provided by Cilium to drive the egress gateway feature is the
``CiliumEgressGatewayPolicy`` resource.

Metadata
--------

``CiliumEgressGatewayPolicy`` is a cluster-scoped custom resource definition, so a
``.metadata.namespace`` field should not be specified.

.. code-block:: yaml

    apiVersion: cilium.io/v2
    kind: CiliumEgressGatewayPolicy
    metadata:
      name: example-policy

> To target pods belonging to a given namespace only, labels/expressions should be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To target pods belonging to a given namespace only labels/expressions should be
```

used instead (as described below).

Selecting source pods
---------------------

The ``selectors`` field of a ``CiliumEgressGatewayPolicy`` resource is used to
select source pods via a label selector. This can be done using ``matchLabels``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    selectors:
    - podSelector:
        matchLabels:
          labelKey: labelVal

It can also be done using ``matchExpressions``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    selectors:
    - podSelector:
        matchExpressions:
        - {key: testKey, operator: In, values: [testVal]}
        - {key: testKey2, operator: NotIn, values: [testVal2]}

Moreover, multiple ``podSelector`` can be specified:

.. code-block:: yaml

    selectors:
    - podSelector:
      [..]
    - podSelector:
      [..]

> To select pods belonging to a given namespace, the special

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To select pods belonging to a given namespace the special
```

``io.kubernetes.pod.namespace`` label should be used.

.. note::
    Only security identities will be taken into account.
    See :ref:`identity-relevant-labels` for more information.

Selecting the destination
-------------------------

One or more IPv4 destination CIDRs can be specified with ``destinationCIDRs``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    destinationCIDRs:
    - "a.b.c.d/32"
    - "e.f.g.0/24"

.. note::

    Any IP belonging to these ranges which is also an internal cluster IP (e.g.
    pods, nodes, Kubernetes API server) will be excluded from the egress gateway
    SNAT logic.

> Selecting and configuring the gateway node

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Selecting and Configuring the Gateway Node
```

------------------------------------------

> The gateway node that should act as gateway for a given policy can be configured

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The node that should act as gateway node for a given policy can be configured
```

with the ``egressGateway`` field. The node is matched based on its labels, with
the ``nodeSelector`` field:

.. code-block:: yaml

  egressGateway:
    nodeSelector:
      matchLabels:
        testLabel: testVal

.. note::

    In case multiple nodes are a match for the given set of labels, the
    first node in lexical ordering based on their name will be selected.

The IP address that should be used to SNAT traffic must also be configured.
There are 3 different ways this can be achieved:

1. By specifying the interface:

.. code-block:: yaml

  egressGateway:
    nodeSelector:
      matchLabels:
        testLabel: testVal
      interface: ethX

> In this case the first IPv4 address assigned to the ``ethX`` interface will be used.

Reviewer: If using enumerated lists, this section should probably be indented to the same level. Same remark for the list items below. I haven't checked the rendered HTML, though.

2. By explicitly specifying the egress IP:

.. code-block:: yaml

  egressGateway:
    nodeSelector:
      matchLabels:
        testLabel: testVal
      egressIP: a.b.c.d

.. warning::

  The egress IP must be assigned to a network device on the node.

> 3. By omitting both ``egressIP`` and `interface`` properties, which will make

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. By omitting both ``egressIP`` and ``interface`` properties, which will make
```

   the agent use the first IPv4 assigned to the interface for the default route.

Regardless of which way the egress IP is configured, the user must ensure that

> Cilium is running on the device that has the the egress IP assigned to it, by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cilium is running on the device that has the egress IP assigned to it, by
```

    nodeSelector:
      matchLabels:
        testLabel: testVal

Example policy
--------------

Below is an example of a ``CiliumEgressGatewayPolicy`` resource that conforms to
the specification above:

.. code-block:: yaml

  apiVersion: cilium.io/v2
  kind: CiliumEgressGatewayPolicy
  metadata:
    name: egress-sample
  spec:
    # Specify which pods should be subject to the current policy.
    # Multiple pod selectors can be specified.
    selectors:
    - podSelector:
        matchLabels:
          org: empire
          class: mediabot
          # The following label selects default namespace
          io.kubernetes.pod.namespace: default

    # Specify which destination CIDR(s) this policy applies to.
    # Multiple CIDRs can be specified.
    destinationCIDRs:
    - "0.0.0.0/0"

    # Configure the gateway node.
    egressGateway:
      # Specify which node should act as gateway for this policy.
      nodeSelector:
        matchLabels:
          node.kubernetes.io/name: a-specific-node

      # Specify the IP address used to SNAT traffic matched by the policy.
      # It must exist as an IP associated with a network interface on the instance.
      egressIP: 10.168.60.100

>       # Otherwise it's possible to specify the interface to be used for egress traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # Alternatively, it's possible to specify the interface to be used for egress traffic.
```

      # In this case the first IPv4 assigned to that interface will be used as egress IP.
      # interface: enp0s8

Creating the ``CiliumEgressGatewayPolicy`` resource above would cause all
traffic originating from pods with the ``org: empire`` and ``class: mediabot``
labels in the ``default`` namespace and destined to ``0.0.0.0/0`` (i.e. all
traffic leaving the cluster) to be routed through the gateway node with the
``node.kubernetes.io/name: a-specific-node`` label, which will then SNAT said
traffic with the ``10.168.60.100`` egress IP.

Testing the Egress Gateway feature
==================================

> In this section we are going to show the necessary steps to test the feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this section we are going to show the necessary steps to test the feature. First we deploy a pod that connects to a cluster-external service. Then we apply a ``CiliumEgressGatewayPolicy`` and observe that the pod's connection gets redirected through the Gateway node.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We assume a 2-node cluster with IPs 192.168.60.11 (node1) and 192.168.60.12 (node2). The client pod gets deployed to node1, and the CEGP selects node2 as Gateway node.
```

Create an external service (optional)
-------------------------------------

> If you don't have an external service to experiment with, a very simple option

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you don't have an external service to experiment with you can use Nginx,
```

> to demonstrate the functionality can be Nginx as the server access logs will

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as the server access logs will
```

    $ sudo apt install nginx
    $ sudo systemctl start nginx

In this example, the IP associated with the host running the Nginx instance will
be ``192.168.60.13``.

Deploy client pods
------------------

Deploy a client pod that will be used to connect to the Nginx instance:

.. parsed-literal::

    $ kubectl create -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes-dns/dns-sw-app.yaml
    $ kubectl get pods
    NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
    pod/mediabot                     1/1     Running   0          14s

    $ kubectl exec mediabot -- curl http://192.168.60.13:80

Verify from the Nginx access log (or other external services) that the request
is coming from one of the nodes in the Kubernetes cluster. In this example the
access logs should contain something like:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ tail /var/log/nginx/access.log
    [...]
    192.168.60.11 - - [04/Apr/2021:22:06:57 +0000] "GET / HTTP/1.1" 200 612 "-" "curl/7.52.1"

since the client pod is running on the node ``192.168.60.11`` it is expected
that, without any Cilium egress gateway policy in place, traffic will leave the
cluster with the IP of the node.

Apply Egress Gateway Policy

> ------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply Egress Gateway Policy
---------------------------
```

Apply the ``egress-sample`` Egress Gateway Policy, which will cause all traffic
from the mediabot pod to leave the cluster with the ``10.168.60.100`` IP:

.. parsed-literal::

    $ kubectl apply -f \ |SCM_WEB|\/examples/kubernetes-egress-gateway/egress-sample.yaml

Verify the setup

> -----------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify the setup
----------------
```

We can now verify with the client pod that the policy is working correctly:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ kubectl exec mediabot -- curl http://192.168.60.13:80
    <HTML><HEAD><meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html;charset=utf-8">
    [...]

> the access log from Nginx should show that the request is coming from the egress

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The access log from Nginx should show that the request is coming from the egress
```

> IP (``192.168.60.100``) rather than one of the nodes in Kubernetes cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IP (``192.168.60.100``) rather than one of the nodes in the Kubernetes cluster:
```
